# Laravel Framework Post Mortem

Building in Laravel feels very at home for me since my day job heavily involves developing in Codeigniter 4, so the mental models, concepts and syntax building carries over swiftly. The people at Laravel were not kidding when they say this framework is made for 'artisans', with proper architecture both on the high level and the internals, writing code in Laravel feels very elegant. Since this is my very first time building a backend/API application, my obstacles were mostly trying to figure out how to ensure my endpoints get their shared logic before returning the response. Luckily, object oriented programming solves this through inheritance.

So the idea is simple, all controllers will extend to `APIController`. That's it. But another problem spawns, what do all endpoints have in common?

I dug around the internet and even asked Sonnet 4.6 what should I include in `APIController`? I thought of referring to my company `APIController` as reference but instead not continue with that idea knowing how garbage are the codes written in their whole repository, which leads me to use Claude to become my search engine and ask it to fetch repositories and articles has achieved what I wanted to make. The result was me making a very simple parent controller than handles `success` and `fail` responses. In the real world, this controller would have more than these two functions, perhaps one function curated for every possible status codes, but one thing is for certain that on the baseline, aside from `success` and `fail`, my controller should have included `validationFail` to handle type 422 responses and `paginated` for responses with limits and offsets. Okay, that's enough about APIs themselves.

Note to self when building API applications in the future, if using OOP languages/frameworks, unless stated otherwise, authentication and rate limiting are middlewares. For now that's all I know, so unless there's a better alternative of implementing these on the API, I will create authentication and rate limiting features as a middleware, **NOT** as a part of the `APIController` itself. For Laravel specifically, authentication can be achieved using `Laravel Sanctum` while rate limiting with Laravel's `throttle` package.

Some of the cool things about Laravel:
 1. Laravel has data type `Request` to handle input sent by the client, which means no need to create a custom function to handle it. 
 2. Making APIs are quite convenient by defining them in a file called `api.php`, and then wire it to `bootstrap/app.php`. Not only that it tells Laravel that you're making APIs, it automatically wrap any URL that goes through `api.php` with `/api/`, so no need for you to manually configure it in your routes.
 3. Eloquent ORMs hard abstracts build queries. In Codeigniter 4, Query Builders at the very least looks somewhat looks like SQL queries, not this one though. I can see those who never did SQL or don't even know of its existence would be fine using this, but would not understand what happens underneath it.
